Let's talk,
firstly about software modeling.
Software modeling is an old concept,
and thinking about software
modeling can conjure thoughts of UML,
if you're familiar with that.
But we're going to be looking
at it in an abstract way.
Basically, when we talk about
software modeling or state modeling,
we're talking about defining how an app
is supposed to behave at any given time.
Now, what I mean by behave is,
when an app is in a certain state,
there should be certain events
that can happen in that app.
For example,
if you're on the checkout page,
the user should be able to fill out
an address field and a billing field,
and maybe click next, or maybe go back
a step, or just do any of those things.
Now obviously, there's things that
a user should not be able to do too.
For example,
if you're on that same checkout field,
the user should not be able to,
for instance,
submit a payment without entering credit
card details, or something like that.
So the way we do this currently, or
at least in most modern web projects,
is we just start with code.
And let's go ahead and go into our scratch
pad and see how that sort of looks.
By the way, the scratch pad,
you can find at scratch/index.js, and
then you could play around
with this however you want.
In this scratch app,
we have just a sample alarm, and
I will just go to the root
directory to show you that.
And it shows the current time and
a toggle that doesn't work.
Right now, it has data-active.
If I take that off,
you'll see that now it's not active.
So let's say that a simple task was,
we want to toggle this from off to on.
The typical way that a lot of React
developers would tackle this problem is,
they'd say, okay,
we need a piece of state.
So we would say const [isActive,
setIsActive] and
then we would use the useState hook.
And so we'll start with false, and then
we put that in this data-active property.
By the way,
this is a property that the CSS
file that I have over here recognizes.
So we could use those data attributes
to change whether it's active or not.
If it's not active,
it's gonna be white and to the left.
If it is active,
it's going to be blue and to the right.
So we could say data-active is isActive or
undefined.
Now, just a note about data attributes.
Putting undefined is actually important,
because if you forget to do that,
this will take that false value and
translate it to the string false,
which we don't want.
We want this data attribute
to just go away completely.
And so we see it works here.
If we change this to true,
it will toggle on.
Now, let's say that we want
the behavior that clicking this alarm
should change it from off to on.
So we could say onClick=,
And we could set isActive to the opposite
of whether it's active or not.
Again, this isn't the way that that
you're going to see in this workshop.
But it's the way that a lot of
React developers would start.
So you can see that this does work,
it does go between not being active and
being active.
But let's take a step back here,
because we're representing
the state of this alarm toggle
as a boolean value, essentially.
We have either it's true or it's false.
So we have true or false for isActive.
But here's the thing,
boolean values are great for
if you have something that
is either truthy or false-y.
And I do recommend that you use them
if that's all that your app needs.
However, what if we have another state?
Like for example,
what if we're setting this alarm, and
we want to persist it to a database?
Or just save it in the cloud, so
that it's available on all of your Android
devices, so that all of the alarms go
off at once to make sure you
really get up in the morning?
Then we need some sort of
other state where it's saving,
and we can't represent that in a boolean,
right?
So yeah, so
how do we how do we reconcile that?
Well, we could use what's
called enumerated values.
So instead of true and false,
which limits us to two,
we want to be able to
potentially add more states.
So let's just try that.
Instead of having a boolean of isActive or
setIsActive,
I'm going to change it to alarmStatus, or
actually, let's make it status for short.
And then we have setStatus,
and we're going to use states.
Let's talk about what
the statuses could be,
it could be either inactive, pending,
which means we're waiting for
it to save, and
we'll fake that in a minute, or active.
So we're gonna just set
this to inactive for now.
And so now,
our logic is gonna change a little bit.
But you're gonna see it's about
to become a lot more explicit.
So data-active is going to be,
if the status is active or undefined.
And onClick, we're just gonna
set isActive to pending, or
sorry, setStatus to pending.
We're going to useEffect, and
we're going to change the status after,
say, two seconds.
So we're going to, or
if status is pending, then setTimeout.
And we are going to setStatus to active,
and
we're going to do that after two seconds.
So let's go ahead and do that.
And so we could do something like,
let's just do here for now, opacity,
we're going to say status is pending,
0.5, otherwise 1.
So it's going to fade
out when it's pending,
otherwise it's going to show it full.
So when we click this, you're going
to see, it sort of fades out, and
then after two seconds, it goes to active.
Now when we click again, it should go off,
but it sort of just keeps going on.
And so this is where things get confusing,
because even though this is a better way
of modeling our states, we no longer have
these confusing true, false, saving.
We now have this enumerated,
it's either inactive, pending, or active.
We have that, but
we're still setting it directly.
And so that's why when we click,
we're setting status to pending.
But now we have to add a check here where,
if status is active,
we actually want to set
the status directly to inactive.
Else, setStatus('pending').
Okay, so let's try that again.
We click here, it's pending,
it goes to active.
And then when we click again,
it goes to inactive.
And then we could repeat
the process again, so,
All right, so we have our three statuses,
inactive, pending, and active.
And already, this is a good first
step to just being really clear and
deliberate with what states our app, or
in this case, our components can be in.
But there's still one problem with this.
Look at these if statements.
We have, if status is pending,
only then do we set this timeout.
And then you also have to
think about cancellation.
So we didn't do that in here, but we could
do that with const timeout = setTimeout.
And then in React's useEffect,
you return a cleanup function
which clears that timeout,
and then that should work.
But we also have some logic over here,
where onClick,
clicking it could do one of two things.
It could either set the status to
inactive, or it could set it to pending.
So basically, if another
developer comes on the project and
is trying to figure out,
how does this alarm work,
then they're going to have
to look in multiple places.
First, they're going to have
to look at this useEffect.
They're going to have to look at this and
figure out, okay.
I guess because of this comment here,
we have inactive, pending, or active.
But if this was gone, now we have all
these different places where we have to
look in order to see what
the possible states could be.
And so that is the main question
that I want you all to ask yourself
when you're creating your apps,
is what are the possible states that
this app or this component can be in?
In this case, we have to look here,
here, here, and even down here, okay,
it could be inactive, it could be pending.
Basically, we're looking for
all these setStatus calls.
And clicking does not do the same thing.
So think about a real world device,
one where you would press a button
to toggle something on or
toggle something off.
Do you think that there's logic
inside of that button itself?
There actually isn't.
So a button in a real world device,
like an electronic device,
or even a physical device like a phone,
you have a button here for
volume, for power, those send a signal.
And so that's the only thing that
the button should be concerned with,
is sending a signal to somewhere central
that then decides what to do with
that information.
Given the current state and
the signal that it sends,
or you could call it an event,
it's going to change the state
of whatever we're dealing with.